# Content Management System

A [CMS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_management_system) is a generic term for software that manages creation and modification of digital content. This is of course a very broad umbrella term that can encompass many different types of systems and features.

The Nabu CMS is, at its core, a set of reusable data models and the associated tooling that is used primarily in web applications and can handle things like:

- security
- attachments
- masterdata
- translations
- tagging
...

The CMS core contains all the core concepts necessary to build an application. There are additional modules that for example support attachments, link the CMS to page builder etc.

This article focuses on the CMS core.

# Model

The data model for the Nabu CMS looks like this:

[:.resources/cms-model.png]

# Node

At the core of the Nabu CMS is the node. Nodes represent a hierarchically laid out tree of "things". All sorts of things.

For example suppose you are designing a message forum, you might have a message board. We would have a new structure `messageBoard` which _is_ a node and thus extends Node.
We then have `messageThread` structure which can also be a node (so it also extends Node). In the tree, the message threads in a particular board are children of that board. We could even model the separate messages in a thread as nodes.

In Nabu Developer this gives us three new data structures that all extend ``nabu.cms.core.types.emodel.core.Node``:

[:.resources/forum-repository.png]

This means, conceptually, we have the core table ``nodes`` and three separate extension tables ``message_boards``, ``message_threads`` and ``messages``.
Once we start filling these tables with actual instances, we could naively end up with unrelated records like this:

- board1
- thread1
- thread2
- message1
- message2
- message3
- message4

However, in a flat listing, it is unclear how these things belong together. Which messages belong to which thread?

That's where the hierarchical layout part comes in, each node has an optional ``parentId`` field, allowing you to structure it like a file system, for example:

- board1
	- thread1
		- message1
		- message2
	- thread2
		- message3
		- message4
- board2
	- thread3
		- message5
	- thread4

We can then start modeling our security on that layout with potential differentation at each level. For example a user might be allowed to post new messages in thread1 but not thread2. He might be allowed to see board1 but not board2. Because security is default inherited by children, minimal security settings can proliferate throughout your entire application.

Should _everything_ be a node? No, usually this is not necessary. You have to ask yourself what you want to be able to do with that thing. Do you want to be able to add attachments? Add tags? Make security decisions based on an instance of that thing? If so, then it probably should be a node, otherwise it doesn't need to be. Especially with high volume data, we have to be careful in deciding whether or not these things should be nodes.

In this particular example messageBoard and messageThread should probably be nodes as they are low volume structural items and we will likely want to differentiate security. 

Messages could be nodes too, making it easy to for example configure the necessary security to allow people to edit their own messages, however because of their higher volume it is not an open and shut case and it will likely depend on other requirements regarding the messages whether or not they should be nodes.

Either way, the node construct is there to help you avoid custom solutions for repetitive actions, that does not prevent you however from choosing a different solution depending on the problem at hand. Knowing which parts to reuse when can only be learned through experience.
	
## Component

When you create a node instance, for example a new message board instance, you have to say which component it is. Component can be seen as the "definition" of a node. This is _in addition_ to the definition it might already have through the data types you wrap around it.

One data model type (e.g. the above mentioned messageBoard structure) usually has one component equivalent (e.g. also called "messageBoard"). But that is not necessarily the case, especially for intermediate frameworks or broadly reusable data models. You might use the nabu data model and its associated services to create a messageBoard, but also reuse it in for example a noticeBoard solution. That means that one nabu data model type has two components related to it.

Additionally instead of (or in addition to) extending the node type at the data model level, you can add additional fields purely in the database. Their values will no longer be structural columns in tables, but key value pairs. Offering more flexibility at the cost of database structure.

You might for example create a module in nabu that performs all the necessary logic for blogs. You have a data type called `blogArticle` which extends node. You have a component `blogArticle` as well.

Me, as a third party, might want to use your blog component but I want one additional field. Instead of diving into the actual backend logic, updating rest services and the like, I could add a dynamic field to my blogArticle component.

There is a module called CMS dynamics which allows you to fully manage the CRUD of components and nodes through a simple web interface, it allows you to mix and match data model extensions with custom components. CMS dynamics pioneered some concepts with regards to standardizing CRUD but has some limitations which means it is now largely superceeded by the new CRUD artifacts.

Components (and their fields) can be automatically deployed with a deployment action for `nabu.cms.core.deployment.component` or as part of the `nabu.cms.core.deployment.all` deployment action.

## NodeProperty

With ComponentField and NodeField you can create well defined extensions to existing component definitions. You can enrich these definitions with certain restrictions (like data type, pattern...).

Sometimes you just want to annotate a node with certain key/value metadata. At that point you can use NodeProperty.

## Logs

The node log table is meant as a structured log for a node. This allows you to create userfriendly timelines of what happened to a node. You can use it for adding comments from users, but just as easily to mention file uploads, status changes,... 

There are enough structural fields present that allow you to crosslink the logs to other pieces of information, allowing for a very rich history.

Node logs can be linked to node history to visualize how a node (or something related) looked at the time of the log.

## External Ids

We reference our own data using __internal ids__. These are ids that we generate and manage, it is _our_ unique identifier for a certain piece of data.

However, data might have external identifiers as well. This could be in an integration context where the other system has its own internal identifier or in a broader sense due to standards or (inter)national policies. 

For example companies have VATs, customers might have an identifier in the CRM, residents usually have a national number, physical electricity connections have EAN codes, bank accounts have IBANs... There are tons of identifiers that have some value in certain situations.

We store these in the external id table.

## Node Relation

You can express relations between nodes by using the node relation concept. You should carefully document for a particular relation type which node is the source and which the target.

Suppose for example that you are designing a bug tracker and want to link a particular ticket to another ticket as being a duplicate. You could create a node relation from one node to the other with relation type "duplicate".

**Important**: do not mistake node relation with node connection. Node relation has **no** security implications, but node connection _does_.

# Masterdata

Often you just want enumerated lists of values. For example:

- for auditing reasons there are different types of log levels, this is a list of "info", "warning" etc. 
- attachments can be assigned to an attachment group (e.g. banner, inline,...). 
- the available languages in your application
...

These things are often expressed as masterdata where masterdata can be seen as having a few important concepts:

- a code: a _technical_ code for that particular entry, this usually follows our camelcase naming convention and is traditionally expressed in English
- a label: a label that is shown to the user, this label can be translated using the correct management screens

Masterdata entries are grouped into categories, for example the category could be "attachmentGroup" whereas the masterdata entries are "banner", "inline",...

If masterdata is such a light concept, why not just use strings everywhere?

Strings are not quite as strict as masterdata. Two string entries might not enforce the same casing but still point to the same. They might be different words for the same thing, they might be translations of one another etc. Unless you heavily curate that list of string data, it is hard to use it structurally later on.

Masterdata might also have an effect on your business logic, at which point you want to use that technical code rather than a prettified version meant for the user interface. 

For example the user might select in a dropdown asking him how he wants to receive his notifications "Text Message" or "Email Notification". The user might instead see a translated version of that entry. However, in your business logic you want to predictably branch on 'text' or 'email'.

Masterdata can be automatically deployed with a deployment action for `nabu.cms.core.deployment.masterdata` or as part of the `nabu.cms.core.deployment.all` deployment action.

## Tags

Tags in the Nabu CMS are tightly coupled to masterdata in that a tag is just a dynamic coupling between a node and a masterdata entry. This allows for example for tags that have value to the business logic rather than solely serving as meta annotation.

This also means tags get all the benefits of masterdata with regards to translation support etc.

In the CMS configuration you can configure which masterdata categories can be used for tagging and which (if any) that user-generated tags can be added to (in case you allow for freestyle tagging).

# Address

When you are modeling things which need an address for some reason (companies, contact persons, orders with a delivery address,...) you can use the NodeAddress or NodeLocation. In NodeLocation all the components are modelled as masterdata, this assumes you are curating a list of valid values.

If however you are using an external provider to resolve addresses (e.g. google), NodeAddress is a better fit. It stores all the values as plain strings as they are returned from the external provider.

# Translations

The translation table in the Nabu CMS is broadly used in all types of translations:

- :masterdata translation: translations of both entry and category labels
- :error codes: translations of error codes that the backend sends to the frontend
- :copy: copywriting that is available in the web application at every level (javascript, html, page builder and even css)
- :operational translations: you can automatically translate operational data, the translations end up in this table if you configure the CMS providers

As a general rule: if you need to translate _anything_ in your application, it should end up in this table.

Translations can be automatically deployed with a deployment action for `nabu.cms.core.deployment.translation`.

# Change Tracking

As mentioned in the data modeling articles, there is configurable change tracking of any database change. The Nabu CMS comes with a standard provider (``nabu.cms.core.providers.misc.changeTracker``), if you configure that one the changes will be documented in the `NodeHistoryValue` table.

Note that although the table has 'Node' in its name, it is in no way limited to nodes. That was its original purpose, but it has grown to support any and all table modifications.

Based on the values in this table, you can create timelines of every value for every column for every row in every table. These timelines can be combined with auditing to get a detailed view of how those changes came to be.

# Security

``Broken Access Control``, ``Security Misconfiguration``, ``Sensitive Data Exposure``, ``Broken Authentication`` are all entries in the [OWASP top 10](https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/) of vulnerabilities. That means 40% of the top 10 most common problems in web applications are to do with misconfigured or otherwise misbehaving security.

Security is hard. The CMS has extensive support for security, allowing from the simple to the very complex through configuration.

## Authentication

The first part of security is authentication: establishing _who_ is using the system. There are generally three ways to identify you:

- something you know: a secret that only you (should) know like a password, we don't need to know the exact secret, we just need to be able to verify that _you_ know it
- something you have: there are hardware dongles (like the [yubikey](https://www.yubico.com/)) that identify who you are, only _you_ have that particular dongle
- something you are: something that is intrinsically connected to your being, like your iris, fingerprints,...

In single factor authentication we only check one of these. In [multifactor authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-factor_authentication) we check multiple.

### Single Factor

For the single factor we generally rely on username and password. Either directly (we store both the username and some form of the password) or indirectly (google stores it and we ask google who you are).

The username is generally something we can minimally validate, for example it is often an email address and by default users are unverified until they click on a link in an email sent to that address, proving that they have access to it. The username can also be a phone number however, which we can then validate with a text message that contains a code.

This is however not strictly necessary, you can use anything as a username, and choose if you want it to be verified or not.

### Two factor

We have support for 2 factor authentication using sms. This second factor falls into the "something you have" (the cellphone in question). Here we send you an sms with a one time use code that you can use to login to an account (in combination with the username/password you already provided at that point).

### Temporary Authentication

The one time use token used by the 2 factor sms authentication is part of a broader "temporary authentication" capability in the CMS that allows for limited use tokens (usually single use but not necessarily). These can be generated and used in different contexts to give people specific permissions in specific circumstances.

For example if you want to host a file that can be downloaded for a specific duration or for a specific amount of times, you can use the temporary authentication as part of the URL.

### Remote Authentication

We have support for what we call ``remote authentication`` which we primarily use to provide support for applications. It allows people with the correct permissions to masquerade as someone else and test the system as they see it. By default the backend sees only the new user, but it has the capability to see that it is actually an admin imitating someone should this be necessary.

Remote authentication makes use of very short lived, securily signed, JWT tokens.

### Secret Authentication

When you log into a site with your username and password, you often have a "remember me" option. When you toggle this, you expect that when you close your browser and return at a later point in time to the site, that you are still logged in.

By default your "session", expires after 1 hour of inactivity, that means we basically forget who you are at that point unless you toggled that remember me option. At that point we give your device a secret, much like a temporary password, but cryptographically secure password, revokable on a device or user basis in the backend.

When you return with that specific device and that specific secret, we will automatically recognize you. 

If you let your browser idle for long and trigger an action in the frontend, your session may have expired and you initially get a 401 back indicating you are not permitted to do that action. At that point our frontend code will attempt a "remember me" action which uses that secret to recreate the session. If that is successful, the request is replayed. For the user, apart from perhaps a tiny delay, this is a transparent process.

### OAuth2

[OAuth2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OAuth#OAuth_2.0) is a widely used protocol that allows for external identity providers to be plugged into your application. For example suppose you want users to be able to log in with their google account, facebook account, linkedin account,... In corporate settings you can use oauth2 to integrate with other systems like ADFS.

[:.resources/oauth2.png]

OAuth2 is a standardized protocol and largely reusable across provider, however it ends with a token. In most cases that token is only useful if you use it to resolve further information like an email address, name,... These resolving services are not standardized and will differ per provider which is why plugging in a new provider generally takes a bit of legwork.

Luckily the CMS ships with default providers for well known services like google and facebook.

### Sessions

Once you have securily authenticated who you are, we want to remember this for future requests. There are a number of ways:

- we give the frontend a JWT token which is sent via Bearer header to the backend with _every_ call. This has the advantage that the backend has no real state, it just has to check the incoming JWT token every call. The disadvantage of this is that the JWT token is susceptible to XSS attacks as it _must_ be managed by javascript code.
- we use cookies to communicate session information to the frontend. These cookies are marked as HttpOnly and are thus not susceptible to [XSS attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_scripting). They are in turn more susceptible to [CSRF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_request_forgery) attacks but we have other security measures that prevent those. The frontend also doesn't really have to care about authentication, it performs a call which either works or it doesn't. The downside is that the backend has to synchronize this session information across the server cluster (or use sticky sessions which we won't get into).

An additional advantage of sessions is that you can store user-specific caches in it, though they too will have to synchronized across the cluster so it's a tradeoff and in reality we try not to store anything in the session _except_ your authentication.

### Devices

Once you prove who you are through whatever means, we authenticate you. Or more specifically the device you are on. And we first check if that device is allowed to authenticate +as+ you. By default an account can have limitless devices without specific checks. Through configuration you can limit the amount of devices and change the policy that new devices must first be validated before they are allowed to authenticate.

Secret authentication is stored _per_ device.

## Authorization

The second part of security is, once we know _who_ you are, _what_ can you do?

### Centralized

Authorization can also be managed externally but this is generally less specific to your application. For example OAuth2 uses scopes to indicate what you can and can not do with the token you received. Maybe you are allowed to pick up the email address but not the first & last name.

The oauth2 scopes are generally used to indicate the access your application has to resources hosted by the third party service. In the case of google it might indicate whether your application can access the drive files for the user.

Another widely used enterprise mechanism for centralized authorization is [SAML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Security_Assertion_Markup_Language).

### CMS

The CMS has all the necessary tools to handle authorization. Based ideologically on [RBAC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Role-based_access_control) the Nabu CMS has support for two levels of security:

- roles
- permissions

The fundamental question that security poses has a number of components:

Does **user** have permission to perform **action** on **item**.

The user bit is handled by the authentication, we know who you are at that point. That leaves us with action (+what+ you want to do) and the context where you want to do it in (item).

Not only do we ask "can the user create a message?" but "can the user create a message in a particular messageboard?". We not only ask "can a user update messages?" but "can a user update this particular message?".

There are a number of tables in the CMS that enable this:

- :roles: the roles that exist, we differentiate between explicit roles (roles you manually define) and "pseudo" roles. Pseudo roles are ``calculated`` state and generally start with a ``$``. For example you can use the role ``$user`` if you want to make sure the user has _any_ valid authentication. As opposed to ``$guest`` which can be used to indicate anonymous non-authenticated users. Roles can have owners, but this is for multitenancy and is rarely used +within+ an application.
- :actions: contains all the actions that exist in your application. These are generally finegrained things like ``message.create`` or ``message.update``. They have an ``audit`` boolean indicating whether their use should be logged in the audit table.
- :action_roles: links actions to roles in a **many-to-many** relationship: one role can have multiple actions and one action can belong to multiple roles.
- :groups: a group is merely a collection of users.
- :user_groups: links users in a **many-to-many** relationship with groups
- :group_roles: links groups to roles in a **many-to-many** relationship and this is one of the most important tables in the CMS security as it contains two very important fields:
	- :nodeId: the context in which this link is active. If it is left empty, the group _always_ has that role. If the context is filled in, the group _only_ has that role in the given context
	- :inherit: whether or not the contextual link between group and role is inherited by the children of this node in the node hierarchy.

## Example: REST Services

Because we build SPA's, the primary security entrypoint is in the REST services we offer to the frontend. Everything that Nabu and in extension the Nabu CMS can do with security applies to a much broader context than REST services but we will use that as an example to explain the concepts.

Suppose you have a REST service called ``example.rest.message.update`` which allows the user to update a message. Let's also assume in this example that message _is_ a node.
The REST service performs a PUT on the path ``/api/otr/message/{messageId}``.

When you are configuring the REST service you can fill in three fields: 

- :roles: a list of roles. The CMS will check if you have _any_ of the listed roles, if you do, it will proceed, otherwise it will return an error code to the frontend. In this example, we would probably configure ``$user``.
- :permission action: the name of the action you are trying to do, for example ``message.update``. 
- :permission context: the node id that identifies the context in which this question has been asked, in this case we would fill in ``=input/path/messageId``. By using the formula approach, we will get the runtime value of the message id, rather than a fixed string which would be generally useless. You can use any field available in the service input as a context, but it is usually available from the path due to proper REST design.

**Important**: even if you fill in all three fields, it is the web application that chooses how these fields are validated by the configured ``permissionHandler`` and ``roleHandler``. If you _don't_ configure a role handler for example, the configured roles will be ignored!

As a general rule, for end-user applications we use the role handler and permission handler from the CMS, for management screens we tend to only use role handling as it is often an "all or nothing" approach rather than needing fine-grained security.

**Important**: if you fill in a custom role, for example ``Message Updater`` +and+ a a custom permission ``message.update``, and you configure both the role handler and the permission handler in the web application, you **reduce** flexibility as you create a hardcoded link between the role and the permission. For that reason, we tend to often use pseudo roles like ``$user`` to do an initial (fast) check, then use permissions for the actual security. This allows for very flexible configuration in the CMS.

### Steps

Suppose you have configured both the CMS role handler and permission handlers (as we generally do), the following steps would be taken for a call to our example service:

- you have configured $user as role, the CMS will not actually check any tables, it will simply check that you are logged in
	- if not, the REST service will return a 401 error code, indicating to the user that he should authenticate and try again
	- our frontend code picks up this 401, tries to do a remember and if successful automatically resubmits the request, allowing for transparent reauthentication
- the CMS will check, within the context of the message id that is available in the request URL, that your user has the permission ``message.update``.

Suppose in our CMS configuration we added the pseudo role ``$owner`` and attached the ``message.update`` action to that. The CMS would at that point check if the user requesting the action is the owner of the message, the one who originally created it. This is a very simple way to allow users to update their own messages.

Suppose in our CMS configuration we added a role ``Moderator`` and we added the action to that role. The role is attached to a group ``moderators`` which is linked to a parent node (message board for example) of our message. With the inherit boolean on, the moderator can perform the action ``message.update`` in that parent node _and_ all the child nodes, including this message so it is OK.

Suppose the user does not belong to any group that has a viable path to the action, the REST service will return a 403 code indicating that you do not have permission, there is no use in retrying.

### Create Actions

Most actions (update, delete,...) are aimed at the node itself. A create action is however a special one as the node does not exist. You can't set the context of an action to a node that does not exist yet. For this reason creates are aimed at the parent nodes, in our example above, to create a message, we could create a REST service ``example.rest.messageBoard.createMessage`` which performs a POST on the path ``/api/otr/messageBoard/{messageBoardId}/message``

Our permission action would be ``message.create`` and the context would be ``=input/path/messageBoardId``.

## Context

While designing your data model, you need to take into account which items should be nodes, how they relate to one another hierarchically and how you want to manage their security.

Suppose you want to manage all your security at the ``messageBoard`` level in our above example, we would probably have a group ``members`` where the ownerId is the node id of the message board. We might couple that group to the role ``Message Board Member`` in the context of that particular message board and inherit set to true and add the permission ``message.create``, perhaps some others like ``attachment.create`` so they can upload images, ``tag.suggest`` so they can suggest tags etc etc.

We could also create a group ``moderators`` with the owner also the message board. We link it to the role ``Message Board Moderator`` which has permissions like ``message.delete``, ``attachment.delete``, ``board.lock`` etc, depending on what you want them to be able to do.

Suppose you have multiple boards and you want to have a "super administrator" who has all the moderator permission but for all the boards, you could manually add the user to all the boards but this requires additional effort to keep this up to date as new message boards are added. Alternatively you could create a group ``supermoderators``, add the role ``Message Board Moderator`` but **without a context** which means, anyone in that group has the moderator permission in _any_ context, effectively making them super admin.

## Conclusion

Getting security right requires a bit of thought, but with some experience, this comes as second nature and you immediately start seeing patterns as to which items should be nodes, how you want to configure the security and the tooling is there to help you achieve it.

# Multi tenant

The CMS has been designed to allow for [multitenancy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multitenancy). This means you have a single application running on a single database but multiple completely unrelated user segments.

Large parts of the CMS are naturally multitenant, for example simply creating a correct hierarchy in the nodes does 90% of the effort. But the CMS goes slightly further to allow differentation which is often expressed through the addition of owner ids (e.g. roles, masterdata...) where you can further specificy that some parts of the CMS only apply to a part of the node hierarchy rather than the whole.

You still need to make sure at the application-level that multitenancy is supported, but at least the CMS has the necessary support to help you get there.
